When we talk about different stories that you've written, feel free to give any background
information on the story because many of the people listening probably haven't read some
of them.
And that's always a good way to plug something.
They get interested enough in the story to go out and buy it and read it.
Right.
Try to do that.
Okay.
Okay, we'll crank off with a real biggie question here.
How did you get started writing science fiction?
Well, there are sort of two versions of that in a way.
There's my official writing career, which began after I first got married to Werner
Benji, my now ex-husband.
He was a science fiction writer at the time.
And I had been a person who fooled around with writing for a while before that.
I would just fiddle around with it.
I used to want to be an artist and writing was just something I did kind of privately
and never showed to anybody and rarely finished anything either.
But Werner encouraged me to take it seriously if I was going to write.
By that time I had abandoned wanting to be an artist because my college art professors
had ruined my desire to do art.
And I was sort of casting about and he knew that I liked to write.
And so he encouraged me to attempt to take it seriously and sit down and do something
and finish it.
And so I decided that I would take him up on this and I started doing a story which
turned out to be the first story that I sold.
It was called Tin Soldier.
And when I started writing it, I didn't know if I'd ever get it finished or anything,
but I did get it finished and I showed it to him and he said he thought it was saleable.
And so I started sending it out and I did sell it.
And after that I was hooked, of course.
I wanted to go on being a writer.
The bumps are getting the better of us here.
Let me call you back here before we do our second question so we can get a better line
on the phone.
I'll call you back in about two or three minutes.
Okay, bye.
We'll roll it and try it again.
Let's do a voice test here.
Is the weather still good?
Yes, I've changed the dress.
It's very nice to sunny out.
Okay.
We're not picking up quite as well on this line.
No pops, but we're not getting you as well.
I'll try to speak a little louder.
I can remember to speak louder.
Maybe that'll work out.
Yeah, that sounds fine.
I like that.
Okay, we just asked a question on how you got started writing in science fiction.
Okay.
What role does your background in anthropology have in your writing?
Well, actually it does play a pretty big role in the writing because
I find that anthropology and science fiction have a lot of things that are common for me.
Archeology was my specialty and archaeology is the anthropology of the past.
Science fiction for me is the anthropology of the future.
They form sort of a long continuum.
The thing I like about both science fiction and anthropology is that they allow you to see how other people do things
and that other people's lives are not led the same way yours.
There are other ways of coping that aren't necessarily the ones you've always known,
that other people just think differently and get along perfectly well that way.
I love the way that both anthropology and science fiction can take your preconceptions
and turn them around 180 degrees and make you say,
gee, I never thought of it like that before.
Specifically, I like to use my anthropological background too
when I'm setting up societies for the stories that I'm going to write.
I do sort of an ethnography, which is a cultural study.
Only I have to make up the details of the culture in general
instead of just studying an anthropological culture.
I do get a lot of details, bits and pieces of interesting societies
which I recombine sometimes to create science fiction societies.
It gives you a way of thinking.
I think it's very useful when you're writing a science fiction story
and looking for different ways, hoping that when you send your rocket ship out into the galaxy,
it's not going to come to a planet where everyone acts like 1950s Earth.
I really enjoy exploring differences in societies and things like that.
And mythology is kind of an offshoot of science fiction.
Mythology is an offshoot of anthropology that I find is very useful to science fiction too.
I get a lot of story ideas from mythology and a lot of underlying strengths
that are almost like fantasy.
I like to weave them into the science fiction, which is what I most like to write.
I think it gives a stronger appeal somewhere.
Possibly being we all have sort of a common background of folktales and myths
and by interweaving those in your stories, you sort of either reinforce or maybe update
some of the old basic stories that our culture is based on.
Right, I think very much so.
I think there really are certain universalities in this too,
which kind of strike everybody at a very deep and basic level.
And if you could capture some of that same feeling in a story when you write it,
maybe by employing elements consciously or unconsciously of, you know, out of mythology,
I think that you could really have a very deep emotional impact on the reader,
which I think is probably what every writer would like to do.
Alrighty, let's see here.
You already answered one of my other questions.
So we'll go ahead and add on it here.
Continuing on your use of folktales and stuff.
All of your stories that I've read seem to have a happy ending of sorts.
Is that sort of based on most folktales have happy endings?
Is that because your stories have a basis in folktales,
or that you're more or less basically an optimistic person?
I think it's more than I'm basically an optimistic person.
Actually, not every single one of my stories is based on folktales.
A lot of them do have those elements in them, but some don't.
It's just that I really, I hate to leave a story feeling totally depressed by it.
And so I think I hate to write a story that's totally depressing.
Frequently, I think the stories have sort of bittersweet endings,
where people don't walk off hand-in-hand.
The sunset there, usually dragging along a few suitcases full of problems too.
But I think the way life is, it's unrealistic, usually, to write a totally happy ending.
But I do like to have an optimistic ending.
When I read things, I relate to them on a very personal level.
I get very involved in the story.
And if it's a story, the end result of which is to make me feel totally depressed
and feel like, you know, why bother to live, I really don't like being left feeling that way.
And I think I don't like feeling that way of when I write too.
Yes, you seem to get very involved with the characters you create also.
Is this because you fleshed them out so well when you're writing them?
Or is it because your characters are sort of variations on yourself?
Well, I think probably some of both.
I think a lot of my favorite characters are bits and pieces of me.
I don't know that any one of them is all me.
I think all people have different aspects of their personality,
which are come to the fore at different times, just in their day-to-day life.
And I think when you're writing, you can't help but inject those personalities into characters.
I really do like characters in stories.
I like to read about characters who seem real.
And so I like to try and make my own characters as real as possible when I write them.
And I think, you know, by getting inside their heads, I invariably, you know, stick a few of my thoughts in there.
I do have some characters who are based on other people I know and things like that too.
But I do like to...
Well, when I write about strange things and new ideas in different societies,
I like to put people who are recognizable human, even if they're aliens, I suppose,
but people that the reader can relate to into those situations
and let the reader see how the human being reacts to the strange set of circumstances.
It's not simply the strange set of circumstances which interests me,
although that's, I think, why I write science fiction because I like...
I don't like to write about the same old day-to-day thing.
I like to explore new ground.
But I like to do it with actual characters who come as close as possible to seeming like real people.
I like to see what they do and give them circumstances.
Science fiction is the only literature which allows you to speculate about the future.
So it does open up a lot of vistas that can't be explored in what we call mainstream literature.
Right.
That's really what I like about science fiction.
I read my first science fiction book when I was in ninth grade,
and I just felt like, you know, boy, where has this been all my life?
I just swept away by it and I felt like I really hardly wanted to read anything but science fiction after that.
It was just so exciting to me to know that these new worlds opened up to me.
Yeah. Okay, that's what we're getting to.
Here's a story question.
Dealing with the crystal ship and eyes of amber.
In two of your stories, the crystal ship and the eyes of amber,
you've explored the positive and negative aspects of a highly developed technological culture,
making contact with a more primitive culture.
Were you sort of extrapolating on contemporary aid or exploitation of world powers by lesser developed nations?
Or is this more like when archaeologists or anthropologists uncover some of the more primitive tribes
in Africa and Australia, some of the things that happened to them?
Well, actually, part of that question slightly confuses me.
Did you mean that more advanced cultures being, more technically advanced cultures being exploited by less advanced cultures, or vice versa?
Vice versa. Let me back up.
In a crystal ship, you have the extremely advanced culture on the planet with the...
I can't remember the name of the race of the aliens.
I don't either right now.
Well, good. You don't feel as bad.
But they come and they take over their planet.
They start exploiting the aliens and then the aliens give them that drug, which sends them off into never, never land.
And of course, their super advanced civilization collapses underneath them.
But you take the other side of the coin and eyes of amber.
You have the highly advanced civilization on earth helping the race on Titan through the use of the satellite that they landed on Titan.
And the question, what was my question here? Let me find it again.
Was that you have taken both the positive aspect and eyes of amber and the negative aspect in crystal ship.
And was that sort of an extrapolation on either anthropological discoveries of ancient cultures,
similar to those found in Australia or Africa,
or the exploitation that the royal powers have done of lesser developed third and fourth world countries?
Well, gee, some of both of those, I suppose,
and just kind of my general awareness of history, you know, it's frequently at least recent history.
It's frequently been the case that more technologically advanced cultures decide to spread out into territories
in which the people are living at a lower level, excuse me, of culture and development.
And they feel, you know, as I think the original justification in Utopia by Thomas Moore was that these people weren't making proper use of the land.
Therefore, we should take it away from them and use it ourselves.
I think that there's going to be some sort of chaotic reaction whenever two societies meet.
You know, two, well, even two societies at a similar level frequently wind up fighting it out.
But societies on different levels are going to collide and create a lot of culture shock.
And it's going to change at least the less advanced society forever.
Sometimes it has an effect on the more advanced society too.
Frequently the more advanced society is so kind of sublime and it's arrogant that it really is friccally impervious to the values of the less developed society.
You know, seeing itself as morally superior and bringing, you know, salvation to these poor dirty wretches.
And, you know, I find that attitude rather intolerable.
Although I think that, you know, by the same token, I think that there are things which the advanced society can offer to the less developed society,
primarily things like better medical care and better farming methods and things like that frequently,
which can be very beneficial to the people in the less developed society.
But it's exploring the different factors and the different possibilities there and seeing what happens, you know,
what is the potential for both good and evil in the situation.
I think it's the drama of the situation that appeals to me.
I tend, you know, I can't help but make certain moral judgments when I write, you know,
when I set up a certain situation like the situation in the Crystal Ship where, you know,
the arrogant society does, in fact, get its comeuppance, which rarely happens, usually in human history.
I think I was sort of operating off of the idea of how European settlers had come and essentially rested all of the American,
North and South American continents from the Indians, basically, and had not done much in return,
but wiped them out and the Indians had been essentially, for the most part, defenseless in the long run against this.
I've been thinking about how the Indians had introduced the Europeans to tobacco, which today, you know,
I feel like it's a significant health problem, not on the same level as wiping out the entire society.
But I think that, you know, my thought from this was what if they had introduced something to the Europeans,
which was incredibly destructive to them. If they had brought smallpox to the Europeans instead of vice versa,
what would have been the outcome of that situation? I think that was what I was playing around with at Crystal Ship.
I guess an eyes-pamper was the idea that, you know, useful values or useful items even can be introduced into a culture
by another culture and that the effect does not necessarily have to be bad.
But then at the same time in that story, you also had the exploitive element, which you get,
as you were saying, modern-day anthropologists marching in on some here for undisturbed Stone Age tribe
and putting them all on national television and just totally disrupting their environment
when they really have no business doing anything like that.
Yes, very good answer.
Do you want to drink a little more?
I'm going to get it out all the through clearly.
Oh yeah, we can whack those out. In fact, if you like to get a drink of water or something, we can pause for just a moment.
Just in the process of doing that.
Okay, you mentioned...
I'm going to take part of this...
I'm going to elaborate on your mention of Eyes of Amber and go on to a question on music in your stories.
Okay.
In Eyes of Amber, the protagonist is a musician, a songwriter, and it seems that music seems to play an important role in your writing.
Yes, it really does, actually. I seem to relate to music on a kind of subliminal level.
I guess it's something like...operaite something like mythology for me.
When I hear a song, I frequently get down into the song and start wondering what's going on in the background of it.
You know, the situation is set up in the song, leads me to think, well, who are the people involved in this and how did they get here
and what is this talking about? Actually, I tend to relate to songs in a very personal way that they have a kind of reality about them.
I frequently can't help thinking that the songwriter must have written that about his or her own experience,
even though I know it's no more likely that they did and that someone writing fiction necessarily wrote a story about their own life.
But I just enjoy music tremendously and it really stimulates creative juices for me.
So I frequently do wind up being inspired to write certain things by listening to music.
In fact, I, I, as a member of the, the title of that story is taken from the song by Buffy Saint Marie,
which is about someone who knows a demon lover and sort of fit into the context of the story where the alien woman thinks of,
of the space probe as a demon and she, she relates to it because it does respond to her,
although she doesn't know what's the human beings on earth, she relates to it as another being and has this kind of fascination for it.
It's just taking little elements like that and working them into some race. It's one of the pleasures of writing for me.
Right. Okay.
I pause after each one of your questions because the machine and the equipment that we have is designed for recording an incoming signal.
And whenever I talk, it records it, but it's distorted and loud and all sorts of garbage in it.
So we re-record the questions and then edit them in.
So my questions will be the same questions as far as content goes, but they will probably be worded better than the ones I'm actually giving you.
And they will, they will match your answers, which will make both of us sound really smart.
Sounds great.
Oh, okay.
Oh, I do. There's so much technical, technical complexity involved in this.
Usually when I do interviews, it usually wind up in the studio, you know, wind up doing them when I'm on the spot or something like that.
It's very interesting to hear about everything that goes on at the end of the end, actually.
Yeah. Yeah, we figured with the radio program, of course, a lot of it's left to your imagination and we have the distinct advantage of not having to represent any sort of visual image.
And that we can just crank up and call up somebody and talk to them over the phone and record it.
And then we process all the sounds in order to get the telephone noise off the line and edit it all together and put together a program.
So it's got some good advantage and some distinct advantages to it.
It cuts our travel budget way down.
So great.
Okay, this one is going to be a question about your future history, which it seems that you either seem to be developing or that you have developed.
Okay.
That being the outcast of Heaven's Belt, Legacy and Media Man and possibly some other stories which I haven't read, which might belong to that.
No, actually, I think there are only two.
Okay, but okay, here's the question.
You've tackled one of the more difficult types of science fiction, that being future history, as in the outcast of Heaven's Belt, Legacy and Media Man.
All the stories having a common background. How did your future history get started?
Well, actually, the future history kind of belongs to my assessment, to the truth.
The idea of the situation in the outcast of Heaven's Belt, which was the original thing that I wrote in what turned out to be that future history,
was the idea of a solar system, another system where there was no Earth like planet,
but an appellate asteroid belt and some gas giant planets where if you had a high enough technology level, then you could survive there in a very luxurious way.
But if you ever lost the technological level, you had no Earth like planet to retreat to,
where you didn't have to manufacture your own air and water and things like that,
and that, you know, below a certain level of technological development you were doomed.
This basic idea had been one that Werner had had, and he was not actively writing at that time.
He teaches at San Diego State University, and he was in Wisconsin, you know, the process of getting his tenure and things like that.
So I was the writer and the family, and he was kind of sublimating, I guess, by helping me work with my writing.
And I was at a loss for an idea at one point, and he said,
well, I have this idea, if you want to write a story about it.
So I wound up writing out castles of Heaven's Belt about this society, and then I got the idea for the story Media Man later on.
Well, I was still in the process of doing the novel, actually, because I started making it as a novella,
and then I decided that it was not sufficiently fleshed out, and I had to make it into a novel.
But in the midst of all that, I got the idea for Media Man, which was from a very ordinary, everyday idea,
which I wanted to take, the sort of the hero and the villain trapped in the middle of nowhere, and how do you get out of it alive?
I decided I wanted to take that particular situation and make a science fiction story around it.
And when I started thinking about it, I realized that the Media Man, the sort of combination of Ad Man and News Man,
which populates the demarchy, which is one of the societies in Heaven's Belt, that being the asteroid belt in the story,
that the Media Man was the perfect sort of person to put into this situation.
And it was one of the few stories where just about everything in the story kind of fell into place at once for me.
I realized that it fit just perfectly into the same future history as the novel did.
And so far, I have been doing a lot of different histories, actually.
I take a lot of different stories, which take place in different futures,
and I've just been having fun kind of playing around with that and having a lot of different societies.
But I look upon each one of those possible futures as developing into a separate future history,
because if I ever find another story that fits into that mode, like with Tim Soldier,
if I ever find another story that seems to fit perfectly with a group of women spacers,
I will write another story in that future history.
And so far, the Heaven Belt future history is the only one that has actually produced more than one story.
The only legacy is actually the expansion of the Media Man, which combines Media Man and the sequel to Media Man,
both of which are prequels to the novel Outcast of Heaven Belt, which gets very complicated.
I do look forward to writing more things in that future history.
I'd like to write more about the planet Morningside, which is also involved in the story in Outcast of Heaven Belt,
because I had a lot more background about that planet, which I didn't really get to use in the novel,
and I'd like to write more about that sometime too.
Okay. Very good.
I have only scanned part of Outcast of Heaven Belt.
Is Morningside the planet that the Starship comes from?
Right.
Okay. Oh, yeah, by the way, I did get a Snow Queen.
Oh, you did?
And yeah, we found it in Dallas and they shipped it to us.
So I have read about half of it, reading rapidly along,
along with reading everything else at the same time, and trying not to get them confused.
But I have a gigantic question about the Snow Queen, which you can feel free to cut short or talk about for the next day,
or whatever.
Here's an interjection question.
I don't think I've asked you this one.
I haven't asked you a question about how you construct aliens, have I?
No, I do what?
Construct your aliens.
Oh, no.
Okay, good. That's a good question.
Here we go.
Okay.
I'll probably move this back up into the part where we were talking about the Crystal Ship and Eyes of Amber.
But since you do have a rather good background in anthropology, how do you go about constructing your aliens?
Oh, that's an interesting question, actually.
I don't think I have any particular method for constructing aliens.
They frequently kind of arise out of other givens in the situation, out of the environment.
In Eyes of Amber, the aliens, although they seemed superficially humanoid, were actually constructed for an entirely different nitrogen breathing situation on a world,
in one of the moons of Saturn, a world which was extremely cold.
They were tri-supiens, which meant that they spent part of the time of the sky, part of the land, part of the water.
The creatures in Crystal Ship were sort of marsupial-like.
The creatures in my story, to Belle, the cat, thrived on radiation.
They just lived on pure radiation.
They lived in essentially a hot, incredibly, radioactively hot swamp on a planet, hidden away in a cave.
There's actually no real pattern to any of them.
The creatures living in the cave came out of the idea of there being essentially natural nuclear reactors forming on the Earth.
There was an article somewhere about how there seemed to be the fossil remains of one somewhere in Africa.
I think it seemed that at some point a concentration of ore had gotten so radioactively hot that it eventually started after a nuclear reaction.
Not a bomb, but just a kind of a roiling, boiling situation.
And so I had these creatures that had come from a whole planet that was like that,
and had been shipwrecked essentially on this planet, which would be normal to human beings.
And they had managed to find this spot and take refuge in it.
It came out of trying to think of what sort of creatures would live in that environment.
I suppose I must, in general, start with the environment and then try to think about what sort of adaptations would be necessary to it.
I don't know. The aliens are one of those things that just sort of spring out of the unconscious, I guess.
I don't really have a pattern for creating them, except that I start with certain givens of the culture.
What are the problems with creating aliens is that if you make them too alien, then the reader can't understand them or relate to them,
and they just seem to be essentially nonsensical.
It's very difficult to try to convey a feeling of alienness and yet something that a human being can still relate to and not simply say,
what is this junk? I don't understand this. Stop reading books.
A lot of science fiction writers have talked about that.
There are frequently accusations about, well, the aliens are not really alien enough,
but then you come down to the old bottom line that if they are alien enough,
even if one human being can imagine something that alien, someone else may not be able to understand it.
So you always caught the mind when you're writing about aliens.
Yes, you seem to end to bell the cat.
You have created one of the, if you'll pardon a pun or whatever,
you seem to have created one of the most alien aliens I've read about.
How did you come up with the idea that the being, as I understand it,
the mind is or the intelligence of the creature is down hidden away in the cave,
and it either creates or controls the, it's mobile parts, the little creatures.
Right.
But it's thought processes were amazing. What did you go through to come up with that?
This reminds me of a story about Robert Browning,
when a woman asked him one time what one of his poems meant,
and he said, matter, when I wrote that, only God and I knew what it meant,
and now only God knows.
I can't actually remember how I came up with that idea.
It's terrible. I don't know whether it's in my notes anywhere or not.
I think it must have grown, kind of grown out of the idea of specialization in animals,
where, you know, a human being is, is, biologically speaking,
a very unspecialized creature because it has fingernails,
which are the most primitive form of things as opposed to a claw or a hoof,
which are, which are adaptations, you know, specializations of nails.
And, you know, there are various other things about the human body,
which are, quote, primitive, biologically.
And I guess I may have been thinking about specialization developing to an extreme,
where actual different parts of the body became separate entities,
and they were all controlled by the mind, which stayed in one spot.
Some of the specialized parts were particularly strong,
and some were particularly agile, things like that.
And they could be sent out, kind of, far-ranging and controlled telepathically by the brain,
which just stayed at home in safety.
And there were essentially two levels of organism which made up one creature,
and the specialized creatures that the brain controlled
had no particular brain of their own, et cetera, a rudimentary receiver,
so that it could send them into commands and it could receive back from various impressions of what they were doing.
I wound up, the way they communicate became sort of like writing poetry.
I used to like direct poetry, and this came as close to million as I had for a long time,
and that while the brain creatures were communicating with each other,
with the other brains and discussing their plight,
they were at the same time receiving input and sending directions to all their mobiles,
their little specialized parts that were moving around in the radioactive muck.
And so you would get their basic commentary and then all the levels below that interaction.
And I really enjoyed writing about that.
I thought it was quite exciting when I was doing it,
but the trouble is that I think I only found one person who actually understood,
without having it explained to them what was going on in that story,
and I wasn't able to understand, and I felt like that was the case where my aliens had got to aliens for their own good.
I was sort of frustrated and worried, but I'm not sure I did it actually.
It was a fascinating experience for me.
Yeah, well, you found two. Darryl, did you understand it?
Three. Okay, you found three.
Okay, now this is the question on Snow Queen.
Okay, and feel free to elaborate or whatever you want to do without giving away the plot.
Well, to give away the plot would take me four or five hours.
Oh, okay, good. We don't have that much time, especially because I haven't finished it yet and I want to find out how it ends.
I'll try not to, what the ending is for this.
But okay, you've undertaken another difficult writing task, that being world building in your novel, The Snow Queen.
It's a wonderful work of science fantasy. Would you call it science fantasy?
I suppose so, actually. It is, you know, in its heart, it's a science fiction story,
but it does have heavy mythological elements, which I think give it a fantasy like quality.
And I wasn't fighting that at all. I was striving for a sort of fiction.
Yeah, I think you got it. Okay, here's the rest of the question. Let me back up here.
It has a wonderful work. It's a wonderful work of science fantasy with a very involved plot and a very exciting narrative.
This must have taken a tremendous amount of background material to develop this novel.
Well, yes, probably. Oh gosh, that book was quite an incredible thing for me to write that book because I wound up being about, it was over 600 pages of manuscript.
It's almost 200,000 words long. And when I started writing it, I had never written a complete novel all at once.
I was with Ascot of Heaven Delta, I had written the novella, and then I had increased its size to have a novel.
I was feeling kind of daunted about the very idea of writing a normal, what I thought would be a normal length novel of about 200 pages.
But I finally did sit down and start to write it. And the more I wrote, the more I realized that it was not going to stop at 200 pages.
I think I had gotten through 100 pages and realized that I had barely gotten into the plot at all.
My writing, and from then on I could only just go on and write and write and write and see where it led me.
It got more and more complicated as it went along until I really despaired at times that I would ever be able to finish the thing.
It was a great comfort to me when I finally sat down and figured out how everything had to fit together. It gets me into the book.
I did a fair amount of background work beforehand, but actually I wound up doing a great deal of the work.
I think during the process of writing the book, I conceived of the idea of the Wicked City of Carbuckle,
which gets its name because it's either a jewel or a fester, depending on your point of view.
I wanted it to be a place where all kinds of cultures and all kinds of worlds came together and mixed and mingled.
In trying to make a portrait of the city, I needed a lot of different characters with a lot of different backgrounds behind them.
Whenever I needed a new character, I would write one into the story and then I couldn't have to figure out where they came from.
Frequently, I don't lay everything out before I actually start to write a book.
I have a basic structure, which I think is being sort of like a trellis, and then the story is a line that grows up through it and fills it in and flushes it out and things.
I think because I didn't have any idea of how big the Snow Queen was going to be, it got even more complex in the process than most of the things.
I have a clearer idea ahead of time of what they're going to be about, but it was just so massive, it was impossible to think about everything ahead of time.
It was mostly the scientific research I think that I did ahead of time, reading up on black holes and things like that.
I regret that black holes and clones became such kind of stereotypes during the time which I was writing a book.
They were not quite such archetypal sci-fi clichés when I started writing the book as they are now.
At least, since I hope the book will appeal to a wide audience, at least people who don't even regularly read science fiction will know what I'm talking about.
I've talked about black holes and clones at this point.
I did do a fair amount of technical reading or semi-technical reading on the nature of black holes and using them as means of travel in order to set up the basic science fictional premises of the book.
I happened to read Robert Graves' book, The White Goddess, just before I started writing The Snow Queen.
I found that influenced me heavily and that I got a lot of the mythical fantasy-type elements out of that and kind of wove them into the texture of the book.
I tried to create societies which would kind of fit in with the most technical and non-technical societies which would sit comfortably with the underlying themes and premises of the book.
And from there, things just grow like topsy, I guess.
One of the characters comes from a very advanced society, the most technologically dominant society in the book.
He started out as a walk-on character, his name is Gondolino, and he came along with one of the major characters in the book in the scene.
And he just started acting up.
And out of his personality, I kind of saw a whole cultural stereotype growing.
And I realized, actually, part of where he came from was that I had been reading a lot of books about...
I've been reading some fiction books about Romans and Britain because I've always been fascinated by Romans and Britain as part of the archaeology thing, I guess.
And just the kind of fascination with the sort of science fiction or reversal where the highly cultured people are the people who too often wind up in certain sensory fantasies,
the kind of dark and swarthy people, and they're usually spulking around in the bushes,
but they were the people who were slob and sophisticated and non-top, and the people with red hair and freckles and green eyes were running around like howling barbarians in the brush.
I thought that was a delightful twist.
But thinking about this and about cultural arrogance and how the Romans sort of resembled a Victorian English in that way,
I just got into a mindset to write about that sort of character, I think.
And so, without even realizing it, this particular character just began taking on all these aspects, and out of him I realized what his whole culture must be like,
and it became one of the important societies in the book.
And just odd little things happened like that.
This whole book kind of grew up in a strange way.
It was quite an indescribable thing, and if I had known ahead of time what I was getting into, I would never have started it.
But probably just as well that we can't see the future, I think.
Yeah.
Correct me if I'm wrong.
I believe I read somewhere that you had some, is some part of that novel based upon the hands of Christian Anderson, Story Snow Queen?
Oh, yes it is.
As a matter of fact, that was my original inspiration for the book.
There's a cartoon and animated movie of the Snow Queen, which they occasionally show on television.
If you can wait through 15 minutes of art, link-letter, talking to children at the beginning of it, it's really quite well done.
I was interested in it.
You know, I had first seen that movie when I was in about eighth grade, and then, oh, this is silly.
But when I saw it again back during the 70s sometime, I realized what an interesting fairy tale it is.
The thing about most fairy tales is that they are frequently degenerate mythology.
And if you know any particular amount about Near Eastern and European mythology, you see a lot of symbolic archetypes.
You see ravens and stags, and wicked stepmother and the sweet young innocence and things like that, which, you know, they all actually have their archetypes back.
In European and Near Eastern mythology, and that, well, just as an aside, that was why the Robert Graves book on the White Goddess and on all that mythology in Europe and the Near East fit in so perfectly with this particular story.
And Hans Christian Anderson had written down what was essentially one of these old tales, which were kind of twisted up mythology.
And the thing that interested me, especially about this particular tale, was that there was no prince in it,
and usually prince who gets to do all the fun and exciting things like fighting the dragons and things like that, and waking up to the sleeping maiden and the women in the story,
usually either the wicked old witch or some helpless, simple, and creature.
And, you know, I get sort of bored with that kind of thing, but I was very interested.
This book was quite a twist because, or this fairy tale was quite a twist because all the main roles in it were played by women.
The basic idea of the story is that there's a little girl and a little boy who are friends and the little boy is still on the way by the Snow Queen, who is kind of an elemental goddess of winter.
And most of the story concerns the little girl's travels as she's searching for him and all the people she meets are virtually all female,
and the people in positions of power in the story are women.
And I thought that was quite interesting and unique, and I was in the mood to do a story in which women played major roles in the book.
And so I thought that was a good jumping off point for it.
And so, you know, from there everything else just started growing basically.
I read Robert Graves' book and I said, boy, this gives me a lot more fuel for the fire.
And I just started writing at that point.
I didn't want to write a fantasy, though.
I didn't want to just make it a retelling of the fairy tale, basically.
I really wanted it to be a whole new story and I wanted it to be science fiction as well, because that's just the way my brain works.
I guess I have written a couple of fantasy stories recently, you know.
I've always enjoyed reading fantasy as well as science fiction, but so far the majority of my work has been at least technically science fiction.
You answered my next question.
Did you have any fantasy stories on the back?
No, no, no.
Okay, you already took care of that one.
All right, we've pretty well rolled through.